---
layout: page
title:  "Optimal Car Speed on a highway"
date:   2024-11-12 15:07:48 -0700
usemathjax: true
---


<script> 
function setAnswer(){
  mpg = document.getElementById("efficiency").value;
  gallon = document.getElementById("gallonCost").value;
  work = document.getElementById("timeCost").value;
  cc = document.getElementById("v0").value;

  v = work / gallon;
  v *= (cc * cc) * mpg / 2;
  v = Math.cbrt(v);
  v = Math.round(v*100) / 100;
  document.getElementById("answer").innerHTML = v + " MPH";
}
</script>
<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({
TeX: { equationNumbers: { autoNumber: "AMS" } }
});
</script>
<script type="text/javascript" async src="http://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"></script>


### Indefinite road trip speed


Say that you are traveling along a perfectly straight highway on your way to work. You drive more efficiently when going slowly, but being late has an associated cost (work hours). What does the optimal speed look like? The answer is shown below, assuming that there is no refuelling, and that there are no speed caps (please observe speed limits). 

# Methodology / Calibration

Find a long straight highway, and drive between 2 gas stations holding one precise speed. That is your "calibration point", and the results are to be stored as $$ v_0 $$ (the speed of the calibration run) and $$mpg_0$$ (the calibration result).

# Assumptions

The calibration/math assume that there is only quadratic (aerodynamic) drag. This falls apart with heavy pickups at low speeds, and especially when they are towing.

# Results
Using 

$$
C_{miles}(v, d) = C_{time} + C_{fuel}
\\
C_{miles}(v, d) = C_{hour}t(v, d) + C_{fuel}(v, d)
\\
C_{mile} = C_{hour}\frac{d}{v} + C_{gallon}d\frac{gallons_{0}}{mile_{0}}(\frac{v}{v_{0}})^2
\\ at\ d = 1\ mile, t = 1\ hour
\\
\displaystyle C_{mile} = \frac{C_{hour}}{V} + C_{gallon}\frac{gallons_{0}}{mile_{0}}(\frac{V}{V_{0}})^2
\\formatted\ for\ next\ step\ ease:
\\
\displaystyle C_{mile} = C_{hour} V^{-1} + C_{gallon}\frac{gallons_{0}}{mile_{0}\ V_{0}^{2}}V^{2}
\\Taking\ a\ derivative\ with \ respect\ to V
\\
\frac{d}{dv} C_{mile} = -C_{hour}V^{-2} + C_{gallon}\frac{2\ gallons_{0}}{mile_{0}\ V_{0}^{2}}V
\\Optimising\ for\ the\ derivative\ to\ be\ 0
\\
\frac{d}{dv} C_{mile} = -C_{hour}V^{-2} + C_{gallon}\frac{2\ gallons_{0}}{mile_{0}\ V_{0}^{2}}V = 0
\\
C_{gallon}\frac{2\ gallons_{0}}{mile_{0}\ v_{0}^{2}}V = C_{hour}V^{-2}
\\
V^{3} = \frac{C_{hour}}{C_{gallon}}\frac{mile_{0}\ v_{0}^{2}}{2\ gallons_{0}}
\\
V = \sqrt[3]{\frac{C_{hour}}{C_{gallon}}\frac{mile_{0}\ }{ gallons_{0}} \frac{V_{0}^{2}}{2}}
$$

<form>
<label for="gallonCost">Gallon Cost: </label>
<input type="number" id="gallonCost" name="gallonCost" value="5.0"> <br>
<label for="timeCost">Time Cost per hour: </label>
<input type="number" id="timeCost" name="timeCost" value="15.00"><br>
<label for="efficiency">Known MPG: </label>
<input type="number" id="efficiency" name="efficiency" value="31.0"><br>
<label for="v0">Speed of known MPG: </label>
<input type="number" id="v0" name="v0" value="75"><br>
</form>
<button onclick="setAnswer()"> CALCULATE </button>

<div id="answer"> >answer will appear here< </div>



